[Music]
good tidings my dear mr. Chabot tis I
your favorite rival
Galka and the pleasantries mr. Chappel
for I tire of your instructions in your
refusal to admit that we are locked into
the great game of our time
by the time this Universal Serial bus
stick reaches you and you've decoded the
message mr. Ciampa you will find the
defense have gone quite splendidly
according to my predictions I trust you
that decoded my encrypted message with
alacrity but not nearly enough mr.
chopper for as I've said before I
playing mini moves ahead and the game is
far ahead of where you understand but I
like sports and therefore I'd like to
catch you up mr. Chappel on the action
of the chess game on the board before us
you see because perhaps you do not
understand but what we do mr. Jaffer is
play chess by post i Gorka versus you
the deep state Oh mr. Ciampa michael
Flynn has fled spice' has been sacked
[Music]
scaramouche a cloud has been dismissed
and slapped and that brings us to ban on
ban on mr. Chappel ban on his sleigh
[Music]
these pawns have been removed from the
board trophies of Gorkhas silent victory
shall Kushner be the next why don't we
have a meeting of the minds I've said it
before look I'm afraid my previous
invitations must be rescinded but I
heard you hail a tram mr. Chappel hire a
livery handsome why don't you why don't
you beckon a Benz and hop on pop down to
Northern Virginia
but the combined forces of the resented
Confederate States and the fate easier
end of the Mack Johann shall rise
together but you are catching up with my
chest play
I have already unfolded a game of
backgammon and you will quickly
understand mr. Chappel that we have been
damaging this entire time
the Danube shall dance over your graves
mr. Chappel the day is nigh mr. chapo
the day is nigh and you shall tremble
before my next great plan you may see me
seemingly fall in two feet but mr.
Chappel I hurt you with all of your
mental faculties and all of your might
to try your best to decode this message
and that is son soon my new project the
solar uranium nuclear test zone ultra
I shall not disclose its location mr.
Chappel you shall to find it or it is
part all is part of my great plan Galka
government override radioactive kinetic
annihilation mr. Shah I leave you to
decode the impossible riddle that I have
given you mr. Chandler mr. Chappell
wherever you might find me you will not
see me I hope you like to dance mr.
Chappell won't you join me at the Danube
until our next meeting
[Music]
[Laughter]
[Music]
