And we're back! For decades Grover
Norquist a man who looks and lives
exactly like his name is Grover Norquist
has asked Republican candidates for
office to sign his pledge committing
them to his core values no new taxes no
elimination of tax deductions no
horseplay after 9:00 p.m. and since I
consider myself the Grover Norquist of
people who hated Joker I figured I'd
start my own pledge during this primary
we're pinning presidential candidates
down on the issues that matter to me
most in a segment we call Queen for a Day
 
Congressman O'Rourke has agreed to be
the seventh candidate to face the
gauntlet
are you ready congressman? Listo. okay I'm
just context clues that must mean ready.
On day one do you pledge to eliminate
daylight savings and never let the
American people see dark before 5:00
p.m. again? Yes. is Trump's Nickelback
tweet alone an impeachable offense?
Should be. Do I have to feel bad as a
pedestrian at the intersection for
hitting the crosswalk button when
someone is clearly already waiting to
cross or is it okay to have a healthy
skepticism that maybe they didn't hit
the button? I think it's okay to have
that healthy skepticism...hit the button.
Do you have to make a kind of little
face kind of like to the person? I
think some acknowledgment would be good
yeah civilized. That's correct.
Would you pardon your former bandmate if
their only crime was selling out? There's
no danger of that but yes I would. You
must now put to rest an important debate
what is the best food at the sad
restaurant inside IKEA? I'm not familiar
with this restaurant what are the
options that I have? Well it's really
Swedish meatballs,
lingonberry sauce that's really what
they offer. I'll do the meatballs okay.
Well that's not correct no I'm sorry. If a couple plans
their wedding in the week between
Christmas and New Year's hasn't that
couple proven themselves too unstable and
dangerous to purchase a firearm correct
far far in policy hypothetical - if you
found out Emmanuel Macron's car had a
baby on board decal on the back would it
make you respect him less? Shouldn't we
drive like every car has a baby on board?
Yes.
We shouldn't be more like oh I was gonna
hit you - That's right - until I found out
that there was a baby. Absolutely yes.
It's interesting that you you picked
president Macron to to make the case. Can I let you in on some
behind-the-scenes little behind the
scenes the original draft had a Trudeau
and then we can't ask questions about
him anymore
you know because of news. Oh thanks for
bringing me in. Congressman this is this
is a doozy.
All right just I'm ready. Tex-Mex, Texas
barbecue you can only have one for the
rest of your life which is it? Can I give
you the answer and then explain it? I'd
hope so. Okay barbecue which which may be
counterintuitive because I come from El
Paso but in El Paso we take pride in
Mexican food as distinct from Tex-Mex so
if you were to ask me Mexican food or
Texas barbecue it would be Mexican food.
Sorry if I confused it but just want to
make sure the record is clear.
I just think honestly one of the
challenges we have is like that kind of
nuance like how do you get it through in
this media environment because all I
heard is you shit on Tex-Mex. Under oath-
can you Ollie? No sorry.
As a former teen hacker were you white
hat or black hat? I was white hat okay
okay that's good that's good that's good.
For legal reasons and also for
you know just in the interests of
honesty. Okay well I'm glad those align. You know a lot a lot of
times in the news they do not. Last month
and this is true the US government was
forced to confirm that they were in
possession of multiple videos of UFOs
taken by Navy pilots after the videos
were made public by former blink-182
singer Tom DeLonge. As president will you
finally give the Presidential Medal of
Freedom to Tom for opening our eyes and
for blink-182 actually secretly being
good? There will be some way to reward
that. I don't know if it'll be
in the way that you described but
point taken.
Yes okay yeah. At least you're open to it
yeah
Should we preemptively lock up anyone
who calls the Joker movie a masterpiece?
For safety. You know I want to pander to
you by saying yes but I haven't seen the
movie yet. It's 2019
you can review movies without having
seen them. Yeah let me let me see it. Okay
okay okay.
Thank you. Final question if you are
elected president will your punk band
Foss reunite to play the inauguration.
Absolutely yeah that would be a ton of
fun and you know all of them have gone
on to much more successful musical
careers. You know Cedric in At The
Drive-In and Mars Volta. Arlo in this
group called Fragile Gang that's here in
Los Angeles. Mike in the honky Tonk
Chateau in Springfield Missouri.
These names are terrific yeah so you know
to be able to to connect with them again
and be able to share in that dream that
was lost to me when I realized I was
nowhere half as talented as the
three of them. I'm sure if I have to use
a presidential inauguration to have that
chance again I will use it so yes. So one
last question you know you're running
for president I think there's a lot of
people that have listened to this show, to
Pod Save America they've been following
you for a long time in fact we get shit
constantly for for people claiming we're
in your pocket, when we're not we're we
criticize you like crazy. Listen to these
questions you just asked me. but but for
people listening that I think are
wondering about you in this campaign and
whether or not you deserve a second look
what is your message to them as they're
kind of in the homestretch of making
this decision? Yeah I think at a time
that we have a president who seeks to
drive this country through fear fear of
Muslims fear of transgender Americans
fear of Mexican immigrants fear of
anyone in other words who doesn't look
like or pray like or love like the rest
of America at a time that there are so
many people who legitimately live in
fear if you are
a child of immigrants and your father's
dropped you off at school and you don't
know if he's gonna be able to pick you
up because he himself may be picked up
and detained and deported. If you're a
child going to school and you recognize
that this country has done shit in the
decades of mass shootings in America -
that 40,000 people lose their lives
every year and you live in fear that you
may be next. It's not a question of if
but when that is gonna happen in your
school. If you know that this country the
world knows everything about climate
change today in 2019 that we knew in
1979 I haven't taken any action and you
are afraid that the 10 years left to us
will be squandered - I want to make sure
that I am fearless for you, fearless
against this president operating on our
ambitions, our aspirations - a belief in
America that can come together despite
our differences not allow them to divide
us as we seek
to be a match for this moment and that's
the way that I've been in this campaign
talking about gun violence, talking about
institutional racism, talking about
climate, the economy, health care, about
rewriting our immigration laws in our
own image. It's gonna take that kind of
fearlessness to defeat Donald Trump in
November 2020 and it's gonna take that
kind of fearlessness to meet the
greatest set of challenges that this
country has ever faced and so this is a
campaign for the fearless of America. We
want to bring everyone in regardless of
the differences that might otherwise
divide us no me importa who you voted
for who you pray to who you love how
many generations you've been here - you're
an American first before you are
anything else and that's all that counts
at this moment. So that's why I'm running
that's how I'm running that's how I want
to serve this country as president of
the United States. Beto O'Rourke thank
you for being here.
