I admit this one is also a fan favorite
around here when Michael Cohen confirms
that even Donald Trump a senior thinks
that Donald Trump jr. is an idiot I
remembered being in a room with mr.
Trump probably in early June of 2016
when something peculiar happened Don
Trump jr. came into the room and walked
behind his father's desk which in and of
itself was unusual people didn't just
walk behind mr. Trump's desk to talk to
him
and I recall Don jr. leave leaning over
to his father and speaking in a low
voice which I could clearly hear and
saying the meeting is all set and I
remember mr. Trump saying okay good let
me know what struck me as I look back
and thought about the exchange between
Don jr. and his father was first that
mr. Trump had frequently told me and
others that his son Don jr. had the
worst judgment of anyone in the world
and also that Don jr. would never set up
any meeting of significance alone and
certainly not without checking with his
father there you go
I'll tell you what if you ever you know
because we all know Don jr. is this just
you know disgusting on Fox and
Twitter but if you ever forget who wrote
it I couldn't even get through all of it
but it was a GQ piece and just the first
couple of graphs about how Don jr. was
treated by his dad it's like uh you you
will feel for Don jr. shortly it has the
worst judgment on planet earth by the
way I agree with Trump's senior shortly
after he said that Cohen in the hearing
Donald Trump jr. retweeted somebody who
was writing about Cohen saying that
saying that this is clearly a guy who's
broken who's humiliated and has no
reason to lie
that is here it is there it is
dollar up Judea retweeted Garrett Graff
saying incredible to see the hubris
drain from Cohen I've been personally
screamed at by going on the phone before
and know how much bravado he once had
this is a man with nothing left with no
reason to lie at all humbling it's
that's devastating the guy's got no
reason to lie he's got retweet someone
hacked my retweet I mean that's like
reading a book that's a long tweet for
Don jr. yeah he only got through like
the first like line like oh we got all
the hubris drained it's like we see
reads we all right let's copy judge
hearing chloride but dad didn't say that
